upload:: mahin@cloud.portal/H1-H2-H3-H4/02-05-2023


[Describe the evoloution of modern english alphabet in cronologocal order]

The Origins Of Alphabetic Writing:
The early alphabetic writing started about four thousand years ago. According to many 
scholars, it was in Egypt that alphabetic writing developed between 1800 and 1900 BC. 
The origin was a Proto-Sinaitic (Proto-Canaanite) form of writing that was not very well known.
About 700 years after, the Phoenicians developed an alphabet based on the earlier foundations. 
It was widely used in the Mediterranean, including southern Europe, North Africa, the Iberian 
Peninsula and the Levant. The alphabet was made up of 22 letters, all of the consonants.
In 750 BC, the Greeks added vowels to the Phoenician alphabet and the combination was regarded 
as the initial true alphabet. This was seized by the Latins (Romans) and combined with some 
Etruscan characters such as the letter S and F. Around the third century, ancient Latin script 
removed the letters G, J, V/U, W, Y and Z. When the Roman Empire was ruling parts of the world, 
they introduced the Roman alphabet derived from the Latin version, although the letters J, 
U/V and W were still omitted.

Evolution Of The English Alphabet:
When the Roman Empire reached Britain, they brought with them the Latin language. 
Britain at that time was under the control of the Anglo-Saxons, a Germanic tribe 
that used Old English as their language. At that time Old English was using Futhorc, 
an older alphabet. It was also called a runic alphabet.


Old English:
The history of writing in Britain begins with the Anglo-Saxons in the fifth century AD. 
With ties to Scandinavia and other North Seas cultures, ancient Anglo-Saxon writing, 
called futhorc, was a runic language. Flexible, new runes were routinely added such that, 
although it first appeared in England with 26 characters, by the time of its demise 
(by the 11th century AD), it had 33.In the seventh century AD, the Latin alphabet 
introduced by Christian missionaries had begun to take hold. By 1011, a formal list 
of the Old English alphabet was made and included all of our present letters except J, 
U (or V)* and W. The ampersand and five uniquely English letters, designated ond, wynn, 
thorn, eth and ash, were included.

Middle English:
When the Normans invaded Britain in 1066 AD, the lowborn were using Old English. 
The scholars, clergy and nobility were writing and speaking in Latin or Norman. 
After two centuries under Norman rule, writing in English became popular again, 
with some of the Old English letters removed. Geoffrey Chaucer used middle English 
in the Canterbury Tales’ Wife of Bath.

Modern English:
In the 15 century, the printing press was introduced to Great Britain by William Caxton. 
By this time, the English language was standardized. From being used interchangeably, 
the letters V and U were separated, with the former becoming a consonant while using U 
as a vowel.The Table Alphabeticall, the first dictionary in English, published by Robert Cawdrey 
in 1604. The letter J was also added to Modern English, during this time as well.
The development of the English alphabet had influences from the Semitic, Phoenician, Greek and Roman scripts. 
It’s quite interesting to learn how each letter was formed.

Letter A:
The original shape of the letter A was upside down. It was introduced in the 1800s. 
Being inverted, it looked like the head of an animal with horns or antlers. It was 
fitting because, in ancient Semitic, the letter translates to ‘ox.’

Letter B
In its original form, the letter B was borrowed from the Egyptian hieroglyphics and 
with the letter resting on its belly. In its original shape, it looked like a house 
with a door, a roof and a room. The symbol represented ‘shelter’ about 4,000 years ago.

Letter C
The letter came from the Phoenicians. It was shaped like a boomerang or hunter’s stick. 
The Greeks called it ‘gamma’, and from being written facing the other direction, it was 
flipped to the direction it is written today, with the Italians giving it a better crescent 
shape.

Letter D
‘Dalet’ was the name given to the letter D by the Phoenicians in 800 BC. It originally 
looked like a rough triangle that faced left. The original meaning of the letter is ‘door.’
 When the Greeks adopted the alphabet, they gave it the name ‘delta.’ It was later flipped, 
and the Romans gave the right side of the letter a semicircle shape.

Letter E
About 3,800 years ago, the letter ‘E’ was pronounced as an ‘H’ in the Semitic language. 
It looked like a stick figure of a human with two arms and one leg. In 700 BC, the Geeks 
flipped it, and they changed the pronunciation into an ‘ee’ sound.

Letter F
The letter ‘F’ was from the Phoenicians and it looked more like a ‘Y.’ When it was pronounced 
at that time, the sound made was close to ‘waw.’ The ancient Greeks renamed it ‘digamma’ and 
tipped it to resemble the present-day F. The Romans made it look better by giving it a more 
geometric shape and changed the sound to ‘fff.’

Letter G
The letter ‘G’ came from ‘zeta’ of the Greeks. At first, it looked like an ‘I’, but the 
pronunciation made a ‘zzz’ sound. The Romans changed its shape around 250 BC, giving it top 
and lower arms and a ‘g’ sound. Latin did not have a ‘z’ sound. In the course of its development, 
the straight lines became curved, ending with its present crescent shape.

Letter H
The letter ‘H’ came from the Egyptians and used as a symbol for fence. It made a breathy sound 
when pronounced so early academicians thought that it was not necessary and the British and Latin 
scholars eventually dropped the letter H from the English alphabet by around 500 AD.

Letter I
The letter ‘I’ was called ‘yod’ in 1000 BC. It meant hand and arm. The Greeks called it ‘iota’ 
and made it vertical. In its evolution, it turned into a straight line around 700 BC.

Letter J
The letter ‘I’ also used to stand for the ‘J’ sound in ancient times. It got its shape letter in 
the 15th century as a contribution of the Spanish language. It was only about 1640 when the letter 
regularly appeared in print.

Letter K
The letter ‘K’ is an old letter, as it came from the Egyptian hieroglyphics. In the Semitic language, 
it was given the name ‘kaph’ which translated into ‘palm of the hand.’ In those times, the letter 
faced the other way. When the Greeks adopted it in 800 BC, it became ‘kappa’ and flipped to the right.

Letter L
In ancient Semitic, the present-day letter ‘L’ was upside down. Thus it looked like a hooked letter. 
It was already called ‘El,’ which meant ‘God.’ The Phoenicians were responsible for giving it a 
reversed look, with the hook facing left. They straightened the hook a bit, and they changed the 
name to ‘lamed’ (pronounced lah-med), a cattle prod. The Greeks called it ‘lambda’ and turned it 
around to face right. The final look of the letter ‘L’ with the straight foot at a right angle was 
courtesy of the Romans.

Letter M
The origin of the letter ‘M’ was the wavy vertical lines with five peaks to symbolize water according 
to the Egyptians. In 1800 BC the Semites reduced the lines to three waves, and the Phoenicians removed 
one more wave. In 800 BC, the peaks were turned into zigzags and flipped horizontally to form the letter 
M we know today.

Letter N
Another Egyptian symbol was the letter ‘N’ that originally looked like a small ripple atop a 
larger ripple that stood for cobra or snake. It was given the ‘n’ sound by the ancient Semites, 
which symbolized ‘fish.’ Around 1000 BC, only one ripple appeared, and the Greeks named it ‘nu.’

Letter O
The letter ‘O’ came from the Egyptians as well. It was called ‘eye’ in Egyptian and ‘ayin’ in Semites. 
The Phoenicians further reduced the hieroglyphics, leaving only the pupil’s outline.

Letter P
In the ancient Semitic language, today’s letter ‘P’ looked like an inverted ‘V.’ It was pronounced 
‘pe’ that meant ‘mouth.’ The Phoenicians turned its top into a diagonal hook shape. In 200 BC, the 
Romans flipped it to the right and closed the loop to form the ‘P.’

Letter Q
The original sound of the letter ‘Q’ was like ‘qoph’ that translated into a ball of wool or monkey. 
It was written initially as a circle traversed by a vertical line. In the Roman inscriptions around 
520 BC, the letter appeared as we know it today.

Letter R
The profile of a human facing left was the original shape of the letter ‘R’ as written by the Semites. 
It was pronounced ‘resh’ that meant ‘head.’ The Romans turned it to the right and added an inclined foot.

Letter S
The letter ‘S’ used to appear like a horizontal wavy W that was used to represent the bow of an archer. 
The angularity of the shape was from the Phoenicians, who gave it the name ‘shin’ that translated into 
‘tooth. The Romans flipped it to a vertical position and named it ‘sigma’ while the Romans flipped it 
to the position the letter has today.

Letter T
The ancient Semites used the lower case form of the letter ‘T’ we see today. The Phoenicians called the 
letter ‘taw’ (mark) that sounded like ‘tee’ when pronounced. It was called ‘tau’ by the Greeks. They 
also added the cross at the top of the letter to distinguish it from the letter ‘X.’

Letter U
The letter ‘U’ initially looked like ‘Y’ in 1000 BC. At that time it was called ‘waw’ that meant ‘peg.’ 
Under the Greeks, it was called ‘upsilon.’

Letter V
The Romans used V and U interchangeably. The distinction started to appear around the 1400s.

Letter W
The letter ‘W’ started during the Middle Ages, with the scribes of Charlemagne writing two ‘u’s’ 
side by side, separated by a space. At that time the sound made was similar to ‘v.’ The letter 
appeared in print as a unique letter ‘W’ in 1700.

Letter X
The letter ‘ksi’ of ancient Greeks sounded like ‘X.’ The lowercase form of the letter ‘X’ 
were seen at the handwritten manuscripts available during the medieval times. Late 15th 
century Italian printers also used lower case ‘X’s.’

Letter Y
From starting out as ‘upsilon’ the letter Y was added by the Romans in 100 AD.

Letter Z
The Phoenicians used to have a letter called ‘zayin.’ It meant an ‘ax.’ Initially, it 
looked like the letter ‘I’ with serifs at the top and bottom. In around 800 BC, the Greeks 
adopted it as ‘zeta’  and gave it the dz  sound. It was not used for several centuries until 
the arrival of the Norman French and their words that needed the sound of the letter ‘Z.’
